
One of the great virtues I see of tournaments, even and perhaps especially for fairly casual players, is that they more or less guarantee that by the end of the event you'll be playing competitors of similar skill and equipment (army).  However, the opening round presents a challenge.  In wargaming and similar there's typically no information to go on, no meaningful standing rankings from which to seed rankings, so players are almost always just paired randomly. That can obviously lead to highly mismatched first rounds.  If points earned go directly toward overall rankings then that's an unfair advantage for the better player versus other potential top competitors who face more even competition.  But more importantly, getting clobbered is a terrible first experience for newcomers and discouraging even for veterans.

Narrative tournaments and pure campaigns also face this problem.  In general, the mechanics of many such actually permit players to be repeatedly clobbered by stronger players.  This is a big inherent flaw in trying to run classic map-based campaigns outside of small, reasonably matched or friendly groups.  It's a big part of why my narrative events are usually more abstract, permitting me to apply control mechanisms.  For example, most of my events arrange pairings in some fashion like one team puts forward a player and a mission, and the other team responds with an opponent and a board/table.  By restricting that response to being within the same win/loss bracket, it prevents teams from consciously or unconsciously throwing a newbie at a hardened vet or vice versa.  Otherwise teams frequently apply logic such as "Well, that opponent has a lot of tanks, so we should send this guy with the anti-tank specialists," without accounting for one player or the other simply being vastly stronger or weaker overall.

But then I still face that challenge of opening round mismatches. Some time ago, a friend and I were talking about similar challenges in cycling races (which I also organize) and he mentioned a scheme he's seen in martial arts.  There they have the additional challenge of many cross-discipline competitors, i.e., somebody that has a high rank/belt in one form of the sport, that may or may not have real bearing in other forms.  So some events begin by having a panel of experts interview the competitors and seed them into initial groupings based on the panel's judgement of the competitor's experience level and skills applicable to the current event.


I have no idea how common or successful that is.  But it seems like a reasonable idea, and I've been thinking a fair bit about applying it to miniatures wargaming.  In particular, later this year I'm running two (hopefully) large-ish events, the new LibertyHammer narrative event, and the popular NOVA 40k Narrative track.  For both I have no practical a priori knowledge of the players, but I'd really like to roughly seed the players so that the first round pairings can be constrained and mismatches reduced.

To do so, I'm thinking of giving a short questionnaire to each player as they check in.  Those are then used to organize the players and constrain the matches.

For example, the NOVA Narrative will use something like the above propose/respond mechanism above as it always has.  There are enough players though (~100 total if we sell out) that we can't do that across everybody in a reasonable amount of time.  So the players will be dividing into groups of about 12 and pairing up within those groups simultaneously.  In the later rounds those groups will be mostly set by win/loss brackets, to prevent clubbings.

Going into the first round though we could use the questionnaire.  If it's a short list of yes/no answers all phrased toward a positive answer being a sign of a more competition-oriented, stronger, or better equipped player, then for each player we can count the number of "yes" answers, sort everybody by their counts, and then split that sorted list into even groups.

This is a first draft of such a questionnaire:

PLEASE NOTE: None of these should be in any way construed as negatives, they're simply a survey of our players that will be used to hopefully group like-minded players together in the first round.

Are you more focused on gameplay than on the hobby aspects of miniatures?

Do you read frequently online about tactics and army construction?

Do you regularly or often play in tournaments?

Do you consider yourself a strong competitive player?

Have you played in a Grand Tournament (GT) or similar level of competitive event in the past year?

Is your primary faction Eldar, Chaos Daemons, Necrons, or Space Marines (generic codex)?

Does your (standalone) army include more than one superheavy vehicle or gargantuan creature?

Is your (standalone) army comprised of more than a single detachment or formation?

The first four are fairly general and get at the inclinations of the person.  The intent here is that the more "yes" answers someone gives, the more likely they are to be at least more competition-oriented, if not indeed a stronger player.  I don't want the total newbie to get crushed.  I also don't want the fluff bunny who's been playing for years but is primarily in it to play toy soldiers with his lovingly converted and painted models to happen to be paired with the latest and greatest barely-primed net list in the first round.  I don't have a problem though if someone regularly playing competitively or convinced they're Khorne's gift to 40k goes up against a tough match, they can take it.  In addition, it would just be hard to ask quantifiable, objective questions about ability given the hugely varied participant pool we have.  So that's why the questions try to get more at mindset and experience than ability.

The last three questions are more specific to 40k and are all very rough indicators of stronger armies, or at least similar armies. Having more than one superheavy or detachment is by no means at all necessarily an indicator of a stronger army.  But it is a good indicator that you're not mentally still in a 2nd, 3rd, 4th, or even 5th edition mindset.  Obviously a lot can be said on that topic, and we're doing a fair bit with our mission design and such to counter some of the issues that do exist while still allowing a lot of freedom to play full 7th edition.  But I don't think it's unreasonable to hedge my bets on players' initial experience in an event to attempt grouping similar mindsets together.  Potentially it would be better to ask about player's support for those elements being in the game rather than using them theirselves, but I don't have good wording for that at the moment.

The question about the specific armies is basically incorporating into the seeding some notion of stronger, "top tier" armies.  Those specific four I think would be largely conceded as the "top tier" by most players, and I use as specific objective evidence for using them the statistical analysis done by Variance Hammer of this year's LVO results.  Obviously this question isn't really dispositive, any given player could field a weak army for any of these codexes.  There will in particular be a lot of weak Space Marine armies, just because they're such a huge portion of the player pool.  But the question is just one point among eight in what is only a very rough seeding function anyway.

Potentially the two different classes should be separated in some way, to more explicitly group by players' orientation toward competition and the current rules and makeup of 40k.  But ultimately this has to be fast in every way as we're operating in tight time constraints between checking everybody in, preparing the data, and turning around seedings for first round pairings.  It can't be that complex for either our players to fill out, nor for us to compute and use.  Plus, again, it's only a very rough seeding function anyway.

So, opening night, everybody fills out one of those cards, we sum up the "Yes" checkboxes, sort by the counts, and seed the first round pairings by that.  Does that seem reasonable?  Is there a good alternative or complementary mechanism to achieve similar effect?  Are there better or other questions to ask?  I and my fellow organizers for these events would love to hear them, in the comments below or the various forums where this has been posted.  This is just a rough draft and some thoughts, and we would love to hear feedback and other ideas.

Thanks
